---
title: 'when life throws you for a loop in graduate school'
date: 2021-03-13
permalink: /posts/2021/03/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - personal
  - graduate school
---
TW: discussion of broken bones, mental health

**Graduate school is hard… A pandemic makes it harder.**

I was never unaware of the fact that graduate school is hard. If it was easy, everyone would do it, right? I knew when I signed up that it would be full of long days in the lab, failed experiments, occasional disagreements with my supervisor, and a stressful balancing act between research, teaching, service, and life. This was the general theme when I completed my master’s at the University at Buffalo. Was it hard? Yes. But was it worth it? YES! 

It wasn’t even a question when I was nearing the end of my master’s that I would continue on for a PhD. I made the decision to switch labs and institutions for my PhD - a decision that was difficult, but never regretted. I began my studies at the University of Toronto in September 2019, and while I had a very rough adjustment to my new lab (because new environments, being away from your family for the first time, and learning new techniques in a new model organism are hard - and that’s okay), I started finding my groove in February 2020 when I obtained my first set of pilot data. 

Then the pandemic hit, which could easily be 10 blog posts on its own.

Then I had to readjust to restrictions in the lab, which took some time.

But then I found my groove again this January, when I obtained my second set of pilot data. I was feeling pretty great. I had a feeling that my pilot data weren’t going to turn out as I hoped, but I had a good plan for how I would quickly fix it. I also had plans to quickly knock out the behavior and sample collection phases for the first two chapters of my dissertation, and had hopes on presenting said projects at virtual conferences this summer. I finished the first draft of my dissertation literature review, established my committee, applied for a small grant, and enrolled in the final course required for my degree. I was finally starting to feel like more of a PhD student and less of an imposter.

**Then add a broken leg into the mix.**

I wish I had a better story to tell. I wish I was skydiving, or ziplining through a forest, or hiking somewhere beautiful. But all it took to change my life forever was to walk 20 feet outside from my apartment entrance to my landlord’s office to pick up a new key for my door. I slipped on the ice, initially felt like it was just a normal fall, but then looked down and saw that my foot was backwards. Think Gordon Hayward in his first game as a Boston Celtic. 

My initial thoughts were actually super calm. I know that I was in shock, because I was feeling no pain; but if it wasn’t for my backwards foot, no one would have known that I just suffered a horrific injury. I calmly picked up my phone to call 911, then called my boyfriend who lives about a 15 minute drive away, and then just laid there to wait and see who would come help me first - a bystander, an ambulance, or my boyfriend. 

Boyfriend got there first, quickly followed by a group of incredibly helpful bystanders and the ambulance. I still appeared to be calm on the surface, but this is when the panic started to settle in. I’m an international student in Canada, so I was internally freaking out about how much this entire ordeal was going to set me back financially. I’m a PhD student who does animal and wet lab work, so I was internally freaking out about how I would be able to progress in my program after exhausting every “contingency plan” possible during the pandemic. I’m in love with running, HIIT, and spin classes, so I was internally freaking out about whether I would ever be able to do those things again. Spoiler alert: the only thing I’m not still freaking out about is the financial stuff, which is thankfully almost completely covered by my student health insurance. 

The final diagnosis ended up being a broken femur, tibia, and talus, and a dislocated ankle. I had a closed reduction procedure done in the ER that day to try and pop my foot back into place, but it gradually went right back to its dislocated form. Three days later, I had surgery to actually fix my dislocated ankle (open reduction) and get some metal plates and screws put in (internal fixation). 

As I write this, I’m nine days post-op and honestly not feeling too horrible physically. The pain is easily managed with Advil and I can generally do most things on my own around my apartment without assistance. Cooking, scooping the cat litter box, and washing myself are still pretty difficult to manage by myself, but I’ll get there. My cast is quite itchy, heavy, and sweaty, and I can’t get comfortable to save my life, but I would much rather deal with discomfort than pain. Oh, and I must say that my boyfriend and his family have honestly been an absolute godsend during these times. 

**What happens next?**

My post-op appointment with the orthopedic surgeon is in a little over a week. I’ll get my staples and cast removed (hopefully replaced with something removable, such as a boot!), a new set of x-rays, and most importantly, my prognosis. Yeah, I’m pretty much completely in the dark on recovery timelines until this appointment, so I’m taking this opportunity to sit around and feel bad for myself for a few weeks until I actually have enough information to come up with plans.

I’m meeting with my PhD committee soon to figure out my next steps. It’ll be difficult to come up with something concrete without knowing my specific prognosis yet, but generally knowing that I’ll be out for 3-6 months at least allows for us to plan something. My program seems to be accommodating and I don’t think that I’ll be hit with any penalties for not reaching some milestones on time. But this situation will be constantly evolving over the next several months, and I know that it will become the source of plenty of blog material. 

As far as my favorite physical activities, I won’t know a thing until my follow-up appointment. My general sense, based on what I’ve read in blogs and from people in some support groups that I’ve joined, is that I’ll most likely be able to do spin class and F45 again. Running though, especially at the distances that I run, may be a bit more dicey. There’s not much I can really do at this point besides watching my nutrition, following instructions from my surgeon, and then crushing it in PT when the time comes. 

I’m still on the fence on whether my blog will focus on the PhD aspect of recovery and my instagram will focus on the fitness aspect, but either way, I’ll provide a link to my fitness recovery journey when the time comes. 

**Let’s talk mental health.**

I’m doing everything in my power right now to talk to someone whenever I’m feeling down. I know that the development of depression is incredibly common after injuries like these, but my spirits are relatively high so far. I anticipate that I’ll be fine, as long as I’m able to come up with a concrete plan for my PhD that I can work on while I’m recovering. I think distractions are going to be key at this point. 

I want to revisit the fact that I’m an international student. My family, and every single friend I made before 2019, currently lives about an hour drive away in Buffalo. I typically have it way easier than most international students in this regard, but there’s just one problem - we’re still in a pandemic, and the border is closed. Yeah. No one from my hometown is allowed to visit me. I’m so thankful for the help from my boyfriend, his family/friends, and the few friends I’ve made here over the past year and a bit. But going through something like this without the help from the support system that you spent the first 25 years of your life building is HARD, and I wouldn’t wish this upon anyone. 

I don’t know how much of the trauma side I’ll talk about publicly, but I just want to mention that dealing with the trauma of my injury will impact me far more than depression. I’m already showing signs of trauma and will be working endlessly to keep it under control in the long run. I mentioned being calm while waiting for the ambulance, but it was a truly different story once I made it to the hospital. 

Finally, I’ve been dealing with a lot of existential stuff. I feel like this is normal at this stage, but I’ll be sure to bring it up to a therapist if it ends up becoming too much. Lots of butterfly effect stuff, and thinking about how one tiny change in action on the day of my injury could’ve prevented everything. Things like, what if I would’ve walked around the patch of ice instead of on it? Or, what if I would’ve waited until mid-afternoon when the sun was out to pick up the key? Or, what if I would’ve been wearing footwear with more traction? It’s easy to become obsessed with these thoughts and feel a sense of guilt, but I’m doing my best to adopt an “everything happens for a reason” approach to dealing with this. 

Thank you for reading.

Well, there you have it. Thank you so much for taking the time to read about my ordeal. I hope to keep up with regular blog posts, mainly because writing about this has been so therapeutic. If you are going through something similar and would like someone to talk to, my email and DMs are always open. 
